The middle class is arguably the
greatest invention of the United States
of America. Forget airplanes, the
internet, or red 40. The idea that any
person could graduate from school, work
40 hours per week, and then afford to
own a home, raise children, and retire
somewhere with palm trees is a dream
life only afforded to the most fortunate
people in history. And that American
dream was built on the back of an
economic philosophy called free market
capitalism. But that dream is dying.
Wages have gone flat for half a century.
Housing costs have doubled over the past
decade. Young Americans are not having
children. And once coveted college
degrees are being labeled by the public
as a waste of time and money. Markets
correcting themselves after a downturn
is one of the most basic principles of
economics. And yet the so-called
American free market is not correcting
itself like it's supposed to. because a
combination of cultural and political
forces don't want it to correct itself.
Ask anyone at Thanksgiving dinner and
they'll give you a different answer on
what's stunting the US economy. Your art
major cousin will say that it's
billionaire greed. Her little brother
who doesn't wear deodorant will say that
it's feminism. Your ex-convict uncle
will say that it's not enough people
going into the trades. Grandpa's going
to blame immigrants. Dad's going to
blame blue-haired liberals at
universities. And someone else will
throw in evangelical dominion theology
just to keep things interesting.
Africa right now. Africa right now. From
Africa right now.
arguments is that everybody is going to
be both right and wrong at the same
time. Universities have increased
tuition tfold since 1980, which is bad.
Yet, college graduates still reliably
earn more money than their peers and are
very likely to report that their
education was worth the debt, especially
if they come from lower or middle class
backgrounds. Billionaire greed leads to
factory workers peeing in bottles and
mass layoffs that harm families. But
their enterprises are also a necessary
component of national security and
keeping America's GDP afloat, which
whether we like it or not, is good for
all of us. And that makes it incredibly
hard to have an open and honest
conversation about the forces actively
sabotaging the US economy because those
forces represent both the young and the
old, the rich and the poor, the
religious and the secular, and both the
political left and right to some extent.
Literally every single American is
benefiting from a rigged system that's
harming somebody else. And they are
unwilling to let that benefit go for the
sake of the common good. Baby boomers
are enjoying collecting rent off their
13 duplexes while those young families
are unable to afford a property of their
own. Neurode divergent college students
are enjoying inclusive community dorm
rooms and vegan buffets at the same time
that another kid is going into crippling
debt over an associates degree that
he'll never finish because it interferes
with his work hours. Regardless of who
your big bad wolf is in the American
fairy tale, there's another American who
is justified in thinking that the real
evil is you. So today, I want to have an
open and honest conversation about some
of these forces that are sabotaging the
US economy, specifically coming from my
expertise as an economist who has a
background in counterterrorism
intelligence. But I also want to hear
from all of you guys. Let me know from
your expertise what other things are
going on and if you have any reasonable
solutions to fix them. And without
further ado, this is a lot to go over.
So, let's just get right into it.
Starting with corporate subsidies.
According to Doge, the Trump
administration has saved $190 billion in
government spending by slashing funding
to federal operations like the
departments of labor, education, and
health and human services, laying off
hundreds of thousands of hardworking
Americans, but also saving the average
American a thousand precious tax dollars
in the process. But what that data
intentionally failed to tell you is that
the US government gives nearly 1
trillion tax dollars to private
businesses every single year. About 800
billion in federal contracts, 200
billion in subsidies, and another 2ish
billion in R&D grants to support small
business. Depending on the year, this
can amount to a quarter of all
government spending and seems shockingly
high for a country that claims to have
minimal government intervention in
business. After all, China dedicates
only slightly more than that to funding
businesses that they primarily own as
state operated enterprises. Which really
makes you wonder if the only difference
between living in a communist country
versus a capitalist country is just a
matter of semantics and propaganda. But
the truth is that we aren't just one
economic system. The United States is a
highly specialized mixed economy that
wants you to think it's a pure free
market so that you believe in
meritocracy and continue to contribute
to innovation and productivity because
you ultimately believe that your success
is your responsibility and to a large
extent it is. But our ability to find
that success is becoming increasingly
harder as corporate bailouts and
subsidies take away our free market
leverage as employees and allow
companies to get away with unsustainable
business practices like keeping wages
stagnant for half a century despite
productivity being at an all-time high.
Consider the standard financial advice
that you should make three times your
rent every month with an average rent in
the US of $1,700.
workers would need to bring home 5,100 a
month or make $30 an hour full-time in
order to carry out that advice. However,
over half of Americans live on less than
that and depend on things like
government welfare programs, section 8
housing, child tax credits, Pell grants,
and other government benefits in order
to survive. One could argue that the
American social safety net, which is
significantly smaller than other
developed nations, is subsidizing over
half of all jobs not paying a livable
wage. Because in a true free market
economy, if you can't afford to pay
workers a livable wage, then you can't
afford to have workers at all. If
entrepreneurs were actually opposed to
things like government welfare programs,
then the easiest way to render them
obsolete would be to match worker pay to
productivity. Because if you were truly
a free market capitalist, then you would
believe that paying anything less than
$30 an hour means that you expect the
government to subsidize your business,
you dirty commie. Jokes aside though,
this highlights a massive hypocrisy in
how people talk about government
spending and intervention in business.
Entrepreneurs are some of the most
outspoken opponents to big government in
American politics, while at the same
time benefiting from big government, far
more than the average citizen does, and
are accepting $200 billion in handouts
every single year, which if you'll
remember, is slightly more money than
Doge quote unquote saved by slashing
funding to essential services, with some
entrepreneurs receiving far more money
in government handouts than others. So,
what's going on here? Why do these CEOs
go on social media to say that
government handouts are bad and then
immediately go lobby the government for
more handouts? Well, that depends on
who's saying it. Let's say that you own
a private business that develops medical
equipment. Once you notice that the NIH
is giving millions of dollars to public
universities to develop medical
equipment, then you realize that your
largest business competitors are,
ironically, the federal government and
universities and that the only way for
you to gain more market share is for the
NIH to stop giving money to universities
to develop medical equipment. So,
business owners will often support
politicians who are campaigning to slash
government funding on things like the
NIH, which in 2025 just so happens to be
the Republican party. But if this was
simply a numbers problem or greed on
behalf of corporations or the
Republicans, then the American public
would have gotten sick of this a lot
longer ago. The truth is that people
slightly lower on the socioeconomic
totem pole on both the left and the
right have a vested interest in taking
away the United States's status as a
pure free market meritocracy. Which
brings us to cultural elitism. This is
the belief that your practices are
superior to others and is something that
we inherited from our ancestors across
the pond. Cultural elitism is typically
a byproduct of generational wealth and
conveys itself through having
preferences that aren't accessible to
poor people, like preferring expensive
wine over beer or preferring musical
theater over country and rap. But this
isn't always the case. Some people with
new money will stubbornly try to hold on
to their previous cultural identity and
become elitist about bluecollar symbols
like say pickup trucks to remind other
people of where they came from. But I've
already made a 40-minute video on that
subject. Other forms of new money,
especially in tech, will reject old
money opulence and aesthetics as being
frivolous and will instead be elitist
about things like minimalism,
biohacking, and their morning routines
as a way to separate themselves from us
peeons who occasionally eat
carbohydrates. But the one thing that
ties all elitists together is that they
believe that their unique circumstances,
lifestyle, or skill set is somehow
better than other people's and that
they've cracked the code to winning at
life. However, over time, new money
eventually becomes old money. And the
newly wealthy realize that in order for
their kids to remain rich that they need
to start rigging the system themselves
in order to prevent new new money from
rising up behind them. Which is actually
a big part of why entrepreneurs do
things like criticizing public education
online even if they heavily benefited
from it themselves. Because things like
state schools are really good at
creating competition by empowering lower
and middle class children in the
professional labor force. So, the
wealthy have to create this complicated
web of like legacy admissions
to Ivy League schools and unpaid
internship programs to ensure that only
other rich kids are getting hired at
Daddy's law firm. I already made a video
on that, too, so I'm not going to rehash
it further. But I am going to hone in on
raising children and more broadly the
timeless tradition of poor people
copying the habits of rich people with
the hopes that copying their routines
will make them rich, too. On the more
innocent side of things, copycat trends
might play out as young men getting
obsessed with things like crypto and
cold plunges because that's what
millionaire influencers do. But on the
more nefarious end, this turns into
middle class parents completely ruining
their children's lives by trying to
raise their kids in the same way that
rich people do. Instead, creating a
society of young adults who are riddled
with anxiety disorders, are way
overeducated relative to their pay, and
are angry and confused about why women
still don't like them despite having a
sexy computer engineering degree. In the
world of parenting psychology, this is
called concerted cultivation or tiger
parenting, where lower or middleclass
parents will intentionally stack their
child's free time with activities that
are meant to land them a scholarship or
some type of societal advantage down the
road. These can be things like piano,
math competitions, foreign language
study, or even obsessively pushing a
child toward one sport with the hopes
that they'll someday go pro. Now, I was
arguably raised this way. Despite being
born to a single mother in Las Vegas, I
have a pretty wealthy extended family.
So, I grew up doing a lot of the things
that you would typically associate with
rich kids. I did everything from
etiquette lessons to ballroom dancing to
orchestra to speech and debate to
becoming president of the honor society.
And you know what? You could argue that
it worked. Instead of becoming a
deadbeat drug addict in Winnamaka like a
lot of my peers, I developed
communication skills and actually
created a pretty interesting career for
myself. But arguing that this method
works would be a severe case of
survivorship bias. A huge amount of poor
to middle-class children in America,
especially in immigrant communities,
grow up with tiger parents but don't
have positive outcomes in adulthood.
Online communities refer to this as
former gifted kid syndrome, where a
child shows above average talent, so
their parents go overboard and trying to
curate their success with the hopes that
this will be a long-term investment in
the entire family's future. But instead
of success, that child grows up to have
an anxiety disorder, poor communication
skills, poor career outcomes, and a
severe fear of failure that stops them
from doing things like dating or
applying for jobs. Multiply this by tens
of thousands of teenagers, and then you
find yourself with a youth mental health
crisis, a youth dating crisis, and the
problem of forever students who keep
getting master's degrees at universities
instead of leaving to find a real job.
Cultural elitism is the dark side of
living in a free market meritocracy.
Because if success is considered your
responsibility,
then failure is considered your fault.
Your parents will blame the fact that
you were given a participation trophy as
a kid for your fear of failure without
ever looking in the mirror and asking,
"Wait, who bought them that
participation trophy?" Society will
blame universities for letting you get
an art history degree without ever
asking who told you to follow your
passions. Your family will blame you for
being single in your 30s without ever
reflecting on how you weren't allowed to
go hang out with people unsupervised in
high school. Optimizing your childhood
for success comes with a lot of
potential downsides if parents don't
give you the chance to be comfortable
with failure or develop some
independence. Like two things that saved
me from becoming a degenerate incel were
one the fact that my mom didn't really
care where I was after school. like I
could be at a park smoking with friends
and she wouldn't really ask about it so
long as I didn't get into any real
trouble. And the fact that I had to work
my way through school without receiving
any financial support from my family. I
got through college on a combination of
manual labor jobs, scholarships, and
student loans. So, I took an immense
amount of pride and responsibility in my
time as a student. I legitimately
believe that were it not for those
things that my life would have taken a
seriously dark turn like we see
happening with a lot of other young men
around my age. I probably don't need to
spell out where all of this stuff leads.
You've seen the data on men dropping out
of the workforce. You've seen the data
on young women refusing to date down to
men their own age who make less money
and are less educated. and you've seen
the data on young couples not having
kids. We all know that we're rapidly
moving toward a societal disaster in
this country if things like salaries,
the education system, and access to
third places don't start to improve
quick. And the meritocracy element of
the free market has already begun to
consume itself like a financial oraorus
because any winner take all system means
that there are going to be a lot of
people who worked really hard but still
ended up becoming losers because they
came in second place. And if people
start to believe that the reward for
hard work is isolation and unemployment,
then productivity and worker confidence
is going to tank like we've already
seen. But lower and middle class
Americans still feed into this system
because they look at some of the few
people who manage to make it out of a
curated childhood and assume that if
they raise their kid the same way, then
their kid will have a better shot at
success. whether that's statistically
true or not. All right, remember how I
said that at Thanksgiving dinner someone
was going to bring up dominion theology
in order to keep things interesting?
Well, that someone is going to be me.
Like I said before, I used to work in
counterterrorism intelligence. And we
had a line that was often said at that
job when talking about religious
extremism. It's not the religion that's
evil. It's evil people within that
religion that are evil. Yet, as time
goes on, I've personally observed not
only that, but the fact that evil people
will try to introduce new ideas into
their communities with the express
purpose of turning other people in that
group evil, too, in order to benefit
their political agendas. Why is it that
so many teenagers went to vacation Bible
school 20 years ago where they were told
to love thy neighbor only to turn into
adults who are obsessed with money,
political domination, and taking away
non-Christians rights in this country.
You know, the exact opposite of what
Jesus taught. Well, it all started in
1975,
the same year that wages stagnated
forever, when Lauren Cunningham, Bill
Brightite, and Francis Schaefer claimed
to receive a revelation from God,
ordering Christians to invade the seven
spheres of society: family, religion,
education, media, entertainment,
business, and government. Prior to this,
American Christians generally saw their
faith as a private affair meant for
their churches and their families.
However, these three men labeled
themselves as new apostles commanded by
God to transform North America into a
Christian theocratic state ahead of the
end times. And given these men's
influence, it was hard for evangelicals
to openly call them false prophets.
Lauren Cunningham was the founder of
Youth with a Mission, the organization
that takes Christian kids around the
world on mission trips. Bill Brightite
was the founder of the Campus Crusade
for Christ, which is still the largest
Christian club on most college campuses
in America. And Francis Schaefer was an
extremely prolific Christian author who
dedicated his career to convincing
evangelicals to participate in politics
and reject a scientific understanding of
the world. The efforts of these men
sparked the New Apostolic Reformation, a
Christian supremacist movement that
advocates for spiritual warfare,
Christian dominion over society, and the
end of the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution with the long-term
hope of ending democracy as we know it,
to instead rule the US under a Christian
form of Sharia law. And up until 2008,
this was considered a fringe movement in
American politics that most Christians
rejected. However, members of the NR
used anxiety around Barack Obama's
elections and the Great Recession to
consolidate an insane amount of money
and power from Pentecostal and
non-denominational churches around the
world, which they then used to try and
actively influence elections and
policies that were beneficial to their
big business donors, such as being
connected to Sarah Palin in 2008, N.
Gingrich in 2012 and of course Donald
Trump today. Right now we have three
sitting members of Congress openly
affiliated with the N. We have Lauren
Boowbert from Colorado who has actively
opposed the First Amendment of the
United States while claiming to be a
champion of the second and who has to
photoshop herself in front of the Rocky
Mountains for some reason because I
guess Colorado's natural wonder is too
scary to experience in person without a
Glock on your hip. Ooh, it's so scary.
Oo. Next is Marjorie Taylor Green from
Georgia who has been prayed over by N
apostles and is labeled as favored by
God. And then Speaker of the House Mike
Johnson from Louisiana who has supported
the criminalization of deviant sexual
behavior in the past and again wants to
destroy the First Amendment. # small
government baby. Now, you might be
saying like, "Okay, well that's all evil
and gross, but what does this have to do
with the free market's ability to
self-regulate?"
Well, everything. There is nothing less
free in this world than living in a
theocracy. Regardless of if you agree
with the religion in charge or not,
whether it's popes, kings, or witch
hunters, people who believe that they
are ordained by God to carry out the law
will always eventually turn on you and
your family when they inevitably become
murderous psychopaths until eventually
the public turns on them and once again
reestablishes freedom of religion. Think
about it. If you believe that the United
States was built on Christian beliefs,
then why would our founding fathers set
the separation of church and state as
the first amendment of our Constitution?
It's almost like they had experience
with state sanctioned churches and they
knew that this never ends well. But it
also makes you wonder what the end goal
is for Dominion theologists today. As of
2025, only 23% of adults identify as
evangelical Protestants in America. And
amongst them, tons of evangelicals
believe that the NR is a blasphemous and
dangerous movement filled with false
prophets. If the NR tried to establish
Marjorie Taylor Green as the God queen
prophetus of the United Church of
America, then they'd be declaring civil
war against a minimum of 75% of the
population. it just wouldn't work. So, I
don't think that their actual goal is
turning America into a theocratic state.
I'm suspicious that their end goal is to
actually increase religiosity by
actively making America worse. Taking
away our rights, taking away our
education, taking away our salaries,
taking away our ability to buy homes,
and taking away our healthcare. What are
people going to do when they're living
in fear of their government, can't
afford an honest living, and are
watching their kids die of polio?
They're probably going to turn to
religion for comfort. Not to put on the
tinfoil hat or anything. Not that it
would uh not that it would fit anyway,
but it really makes you wonder if these
people see the medieval period as like
the golden age of the church and that
they're willing to destroy 500 years of
progress in order to take us back to
that. But hey, that's just a theory. For
all we know, literally all of the United
States's socioeconomic problems could be
solved if companies just gave everyone a
150% raise and we were all making a
liveable wage at our jobs. Like maybe
I'm just being paranoid about everything
else. So, let me know in the comments
below. What have I missed? What other
socioeconomic factors are contributing
to the United States's decline based off
your expertise and observations? This
channel, for whatever reason, attracts
some shockingly like level-headed
commenters. So, I would really like to
hear from all of you, and I will see you
in the next one.
[Music]
[Applause]